---
inFeed: true
hasPage: true
inNav: false
inLanguage: null
keywords: []
description: 'When faced with drastic change that’s not of our choosing, do we have any?'
datePublished: '2016-05-03T10:31:36.307Z'
dateModified: '2016-05-03T10:25:48.992Z'
title: Choice
author: []
authors: []
publisher:
  name: null
  domain: null
  url: null
  favicon: null
starred: false
sourcePath: _posts/2016-05-03-choice.md
published: true
url: choice/index.html
_type: Article

---
# Choice

When faced with drastic change that's not of our choosing, do we have any?

This is particularly relevant when we experience things that happen to us...reorganisation at work, or worse redundancy. An accident, marriage break up, illness, death of a loved one.

I didn't choose this. Somebody else did this to me. I am a victim.

Hang on, I don't want to be a victim. That's not good. I'm going to complain...no no no, I am not going to accept this.

What do you mean it's happening anyway?...I can't change it?...I am a victim after all??

I am a victim.

Well, that's that then. I'm a victim. Fate has it in for me. It doesn't matter what I do, I can't escape fate. It's not fair, I don't deserve this. I didn't choose this, if the government (substitute as appropriate: boss, other driver, partner, doctor etc) had acted differently I wouldn't be in this mess.

It's their fault, it's not my fault, I'm a victim.

I'm a victim, it's their fault and I can't change them. I can't get my own back. There's no way back.

I am a victim. I have no choice.

Really?

Well, we can't change what has happened. It's very difficult to undo something you have done. You can't "unsay" something. You can't undo something somebody has done to you. Any more than you can change the weather.

You can't immediately change the way you feel about something any more than you change the way somebody else reacts to something you have done. But have you ever noticed that if you've apologised to someone, their initial reaction changes? I am sorry I upset you. That's ok.

To say sorry is a choice. It doesn't change what has happened, but it helps the person accept the situation and starts making a basis for moving forward.

Well maybe you get an apology and maybe you don't. But you can always give yourself one. Sympathy is good. I am sorry that this happened to me. I feel bad. I don't like it. I am sorry for myself.

Then you get to make a choice.

I can continue to complain. I can moan. I can swear at the responsible people. I can use my negative energy to let everyone know that I feel bad. I can go find more sympathy. I can get someone else to tell me I'm justified in feeling bad, it's my right to go on feeling bad. I can keep doing that until I cannot remember what it feels like not to feel bad.

OR...

I can choose something else. I can choose to accept what happened, choose to accept that I feel bad, and choose to plot a new course to a happier place. It will take time. I will need help. I will learn from this situation. I will grow as a person. I will do something that makes me happier.

I choose not to be a victim.

Change. Learn. Grow. Do.